Excellent.
Thank you very much.
I know that we're running weird on some time somewhere,
so people can...
Perfect.
I won't need it all.
I'll go through this quickly, hopefully.
But yeah, thank you for being here.
Thank you for joining this talk.
Enterprise data is maybe not the most exciting topic, but I
hope that I will make this interesting for you.
Thank you.
I love it.
There we go.
All right.
So the title of this talk, it's the thing where
when the headline is a question and it can be answered no
, maybe it's not worth your time.
So I'm going to tell you a little bit in advance
that the answer of did Lexicon accidentally solve the enterprise data
problem.
The answer is probably no, but I want to give this
talk because I really want it to be yes.
And I'm going to explain why over the next, say
, 29 minutes and 16 seconds.
So a little bit about me.
My name is Emily Gorsensky.
I'm a data scientist by background.
I was actually, R&D is sort of where I
started my career.
I realized at some point that all of the algorithms I was
doing for like biotechnology and aerospace and all that good stuff
was in this like new and upcoming field that they were calling
data science and that those people get paid a lot more money
than I was making.
So I just said, I'm a data scientist now and
it stuck.
But you can find me on the internet here.
And how did I get into AT proto stuff?
Well, it started because I think that the internet is horrible
and I really wanted to curate my own presence on the
internet.
So if you've ever had a tweet or a skeet
go viral, you know it's like the worst thing in
the world.
Like it's not actually something you want to happen.
So I created a little script called Skeeter Deleter,
which I use to curate my own feed.
So I get to pick the things that I want to keep
so that if anyone visits me, they can't go back
in my timeline and find things to cancel me over.
But I will tell you, I will say some things that
you'll probably cancel me over today.
Data things.
I also run a labeler called Brand Block Online because the
internet is horrible.
The worst part about it is the evil brands who are coming
in trying to be funny.
So I built a labeler to block the brands.
So if you don't want to see on your timeline Ar
by's trying to joke with Taco Bell, this is your
tool.
And this is something new that I just recently built because I
finally figured out how to do OAuth kind of for AT
proto.
This is just like a little wish list slash registry slash mutual
aid compilation tool.
I'm going to be opening this up for beta.
So if you want to test it out, I'm going
to try to launch this by the end of the conference.
But you do need to follow me on Blue Sky.
That's not intentionally manipulative.
It's just the easiest way that I have to limit the
number of people using it right now.
I don't feel like doing an invite system.
And then my professional world, I'm a CTO of
a startup.
The title is fancier than the actual what I'm doing
day-to-day.
What I'm doing day-to-day is actually building
just sort of like accounting software.
So if you have QuickBooks data and you want dashboards
, I can do that.
But before I joined the startup world, I was doing consulting
for eight years, which is why I talk about enterprise data
.
So the thing that's interesting about the enterprise data space,
and like I told you that I'm a data scientist.
I came from an R&D background.
Like I peaked in Fortran.
I'm not like one of these web people, right?
And if you look at the AT proto, or I'm
sorry, at proto, I learned that it's at proto
.
I thought it was actually Austria proto for a while.
If you look at the tooling, it's in TypeScript
, it's in Go, and if you're really cool
, it's in Rust.
And those are like the hip languages, right?
And those aren't the languages that data people use.
But it's also reflective of the mindset that at proto developers
have, which is that when you're building web applications,
you're treating data like a hot potato.
Like data comes in, you want to like get rid of
it as quickly as you can, right?
Because the longer that you're holding on to data and processing
it and doing things to it, the harder your system becomes
to maintain and operate at scale, right?
And so web developers have built all of these really cool tools
and languages, and they're like really hip.
We've got these really cool conferences in places like the University
of British Columbia, and they wear jeans to work, and
they're really like awesome, right?
And data people are kind of different than that.
Like they kind of emerge from the world of database administrators,
and database administrators are famous for being grumpy, and they
don't like change, and they don't like you,
and they don't like your fancy languages.
Like we're all toiling in the SQL minds.
We might be writing some Python.
If you're really like fancy, you might do a little
Scala or Spark in the data space.
And a lot of these folks are sitting there maintaining systems that
have been around for 25 years, and they're like not
wearing jeans and hoodies to work.
They're wearing like khakis and polos because they have
serious jobs, and they're holding serious data that all of
these like multi-billion companies will stop operating if anything
happens to it.
So they don't want to do change.
They don't want to do a lot of fancy technology development
.
And this is a little bit of hyperbole.
I have known database administrators who from time to time do wear
jeans.
The thing about enterprise data is that it's not really technology
development.
It's anthropology.
Because when you're dealing with a company that has been around
for 20, 30, 50, 100, 150, sometimes
longer years, the information that you have is all historical.
And it reflects the relationships of a business, its departments,
its entities, its customers, and its suppliers.
You all are probably familiar with Conway's law that the
architecture of a system reflects the communication patterns of a company.
Well, that all comes through in enterprise data.
I've actually worked with data systems that you can pinpoint the
exact day that two teams stop talking to each other.
And you can do that because the fields change.
And then you have to carry around this conditional with a magically
coded date.
Because on June 16th of 2007, these two teams went
through a reorg.
And then all of your logic has to carry that through for
all time.
And so this is like an anthropological problem which makes sharing
and using this data and doing anything meaningful with it very,
very difficult.
So what is the problem with enterprise data?
The problem is that data access is slow, it's difficult
, it's expensive.
So is the analysis, so is the data engineering.
I've gone to data engineering teams as a consultant.
I said, tell me about your problems.
They said, well, here's our backlog.
And I said, you know, how many tickets do you
do each week?
And they said, week, that's ambitious.
We do maybe 20 tickets per quarter.
And they said, well, how many new tickets per quarter
do you get?
They say 40.
So that's not a solution.
That's not like a situation that's getting better, right
?
And then you also see things like data science seems like early
, mid-2000s, everyone's like, oh,
you've got to have data scientists because AI is coming,
right?
So they went out and they like pulled all of these people
out of like academia, right?
A lot of neuropsych people, a lot of like
astronomy, physics, all of that, people who know like
good mathy stuff.
And they put them in a team.
They didn't really explain to them how to work in an
enterprise environment.
And so they built a lot of stuff that was really cool
, but it wasn't in phase of product development.
And so then you have like these really cool algorithms that nobody
knows how to deploy.
Nobody knows how to run the code for it.
And by the time they actually get it, they're like
six months out of date anyways, so it doesn't actually
add value.
And then like data folks don't really do agile.
Like version control, like they're still clicking tools, like
building ETL pipelines with drag and drop, right?
Like continuous delivery isn't a thing.
CD, it's like a thing that you put music on
.
And DevOps is a fancy team to data folks that nobody can
explain, right?
Like the data folks, they don't really understand how to
do rapid, fast, agile software development.
Again, hyperbole, because a lot of things are
getting better.
But if you go into an enterprise, there's still a
lot of stuff where they don't even know how to use
Git.
I've actually gone into clients at big companies and had like
day one, I'm like, all right, let's
talk about your architecture.
And by day three, I'm like, okay, here
's how to do Git status.
And the problem is that like within software development, we favored
software developers.
We've given them a lot of tools to build software really
quick.
And a lot of what we've done is we've absol
ved them of the duty and the responsibility to care about things
like data quality, data semantics, the relevance of the
data, right?
We're just like, here, keep, get the data
quick, throw it somewhere.
And then they're pushing it to Kafka streams and stuff like
that.
And it's all great.
It's great for them.
And then some data engineer has to sort out that mess.
And we've tried solving this with like lots of different architect
ures.
If you talk to data people, they love talking about architecture
.
We've gone from data warehouses to data lakes.
Data lakes became data swamps.
We've built things like data vaults, which is,
I guess, if you really want to make your data model
complicated, data vault is great.
We've added Greek letters to it, a Lambda architecture or
a Kappa architecture.
And this has all gone sort of in a cyclical pattern
, right?
This shift between centralization and decentralization.
And so what happens is most enterprises are like, we need
a big database.
So they build a big database.
And they're like, here's our data warehouse.
It's OLAP.
It's all this stuff.
And then there's a bottleneck and there's a backlog
.
And so they say, this isn't working.
And then finally somebody with enough political clout in the organization
is like, screw you all.
I'm building my own database.
And then that happens once.
And then the next team's like, well, they did
it.
So I'm going to do it.
And so the next thing you know, like you're three
, four or five years later, and now you've got
the shadow IT situation going on.
There's all of these different data systems.
And somebody goes, why are we spending all this money on
data systems?
Let's do another big consolidation.
I've come in on the back end of $100 million
failed data architecture consolidation projects, right?
Tons of money go into this.
It's all been very expensive and nothing has worked.
Nothing has worked.
Sometimes things get a little bit better, but every organization I
talk to has the same exact problems, right?
And so when I was at ThoughtWorks, we came
up with this solution that I'm going to talk about.
But a little bit about why it doesn't work.
Sorry, I almost skipped a slide here.
You just have this situation of like data governance is a mess
.
Data catalogs are all kind of terrible.
Schematics are discombobulated.
Semantics are even worse.
Like systems don't talk to each other.
People don't talk to each other.
It's just a bad situation like for most of the time
.
And what we actually need is a scalable and consistent way to
define the exchange of data between organizations, systems, parties,
companies, whatever.
We need platform independence, right?
So we have systems, you know, lots of companies are
like, we're going to be on Azure and AWS and
Google because we don't want to put all our eggs in
one basket.
And now you have three different types of ecosystems.
It's like Tower of Babel.
Nobody's speaking the same data language.
And we need lightweight oriented models, right?
So when I was at ThoughtWorks, we came up
with this idea called data mesh.
Data mesh is a bit like communism.
It came out of conditions.
And the conditions that we talked about were all of this like
fragmented ecosystem of, you know, not having this way
, this common way of defining what it is that you mean
when you're talking about data.
So if you don't know what you're talking about when
it comes to data, you don't know how to even
describe a way to share and exchange it.
So data mesh came up with, it's a decentralized model
of working with data that focuses on data as a product,
right?
So we actually wanted to think about like, what if you
worked with big data in the same way that you work with
microservices, which is kind of a nonsensical
way of thinking about it because microservices are designed to be
really, really small and big data is like, by definition
, very, very big.
So we came up with these ideas of like, okay,
let's make data a product.
Well, when you're doing microservices development, you're
usually domain oriented.
You usually have a platform like Kubernetes or something to deploy your
service on.
And then of course, everyone said, well, that doesn
't work.
We need to govern it.
And so then we stapled on federated computational governance to
make them happy and then try to like figure out what that
was going to be.
And this is a really great theory.
Again, data meshes like communism is really great in theory
.
The practice has been a little bit less stellar in some cases
, right?
Because domain oriented data products, they're a good idea,
but we haven't given anyone the tools of how to actually
do it and implement it correctly.
So what if we just pretended like those challenges didn't exist
?
Like what if we just decided that we're going to start
from scratch we're not going to talk about all of your
semantic layer, we're not going to talk about all of
your legacy systems, we're just going to build a micros
ervice around data.
What would that look like?
It's actually not that bad of an idea.
The problem is once you start to try to implement that,
everything falls apart.
The tooling sucks, the data catalogs suck.
It requires a ton of platform engineering.
Nothing is really set up for this, right?
Like there's no standard language for defining what a data product
is or how it should interact.
There's no standard way of like joining the semantics from
two different domains together.
And there's a lot of languages that have come up like
OWL and RDF and all this other stuff to try
to define how data looks and how data should be shaped.
But they have all of these gaps about how we're supposed
to, defining how we're supposed to work with data.
So when you actually dive into, and this is where we
get to lexicon, there's a little bit of
Chekhov's gun that I'm setting up here.
If you look at the way that we model data, we
care about really two things.
We look at the nouns and the verbs.
The nouns are what the data means, how it's structured
, who owns it, who can access it, what are
the permissions, etc.
And sometimes those have adjectives like the type of the data
or the frequency that it's updated, the freshness of
it, things like that.
And then we also have, so I'll jump into the
verbs in a second, but this is a great example of
talking about the nouns.
So I pulled this like random OWL 2 definition off of
, I don't know, the internet somewhere, which is
great.
It's talking about the physical quality of the thermal energy of
a system, and it defines all of this like really specific
stuff.
Half of the characters, solidly more than half of the
characters in here are metadata, like meta metadata about like the
lengths of like where to find the actual thing that you're
seeing.
And so this is really cool if you want to know that
like this number is about the physical quality of the thermal energy
of a system, but it doesn't tell you what that
means in any sort of context, right?
It doesn't tell you what you should do about it or
why you should care about it.
So the problem with that type of approach and the problem with
all of those types of data specification languages that we've seen
is that they tend to be very static.
It assumes that data is fully self-contained, that
you can just kind of like look at a thing and describe
its properties and be like, aha, I now have a
perfect platonic ideal of a chair.
I've defined exactly what a chair is, but you don
't talk, like you don't do anything about like how
a chair should be used, right?
And then on top of that, it becomes really difficult to
start to contextualize it because in reality, you need to
start to think about how these nouns become composed with each other
, how they interplay, right?
And so there's some stuff out there working on how to
overlay different data definition languages in a practical systems context, but
we're still missing the whole like action element of it.
The thing is with like building a microservice style architecture,
you also need to define those verbs.
You need to define how these services interact.
That's actually the critical thing about it.
If you look at something like the open API spec, it
's really great.
It talks about how you access the data, what to do
with the data, what are the things that you can,
like how do you write it, update it, delete it
, whatever.
You define your API spec.
It tells you exactly like this is going to be a put
, this is going to be a get, this is going
to be a post, whatever.
How to request permission for the data is often part of that
like broader spec and how systems should handle the data, right
?
And so you can do that with those tools, but if
you start looking at things like open API, then they start
to sort of fall away on the definitions of the nouns,
right?
So open API is great because it gives you a little bit
of a shape of the data, but beyond sort of the
basic sort of JSON types and it's really limited in that
case, it doesn't really tell you about what the data
means in a broader context, right?
So all of this sort of ecosystem of defining data through these
sort of specification languages, all of this also omits this
concept of domain ownership whatsoever.
You're basically just saying data exists, here it is,
or systems exist, here they are.
We're not really talking about how to access them, who
owns them, what they should do about them.
So if you're going to build a good data product language
, you need to have a concrete encoding of your domain ownership
, so who owns this, what do they own it for
, you need to have a clear and concise, an ext
ensible definition of the nouns, and a flexible, versionable
definition of the verbs.
So you need to be able to encode change over time
, you need to be able to encode what it is
that you're describing, and who owns it.
So those three things are key.
As I mentioned, Data Mesh was a great idea for
trying to put together these data products, but it really suffered
from four key flaws.
The first of it is, if you know ThoughtWorks
at all, ThoughtWorks tended to be a little bit
dogmatic.
It was a criticism of the company as long as I worked
there that existed even before I worked there.
And Data Mesh was like, we were trying to do
everything with microservices, and so we just sort of almost
naively applied that to a really big data architecture project.
And this existed, there's like no tooling for it,
there's no equivalent to Kubernetes for standing up like a massive
, large-scale data processing system, aside from Kubernetes,
which is really difficult if you've ever actually tried to do
big data processing in Kubernetes, like running Spark in Kubernetes is
really difficult.
A lot of change, like again, Data Mesh,
it requires a lot of re-education, right?
The way that you work with data, the way that your
data people are actually doing things.
You have to teach them DevOps, you have to teach them
Agile, you have to teach them domain ownership.
Really difficult.
And then we also spent the last like decade decoupling
software devs from any downstream responsibility for their data, and
now we're turning around and saying, oh wait, no
, no, no.
now you have to be responsible for that again.
And they didn't really like that.
So, I mentioned that we need, you know, all
of these definitions around nouns and verbs and domain ownership and stuff
like that.
And yes, this is now Chekhov's gun going
off, because if you look at lexicon, you
look at the spec, it actually kind of elegantly solved
all three of those problems and I don't even think that
it was trying to.
The first thing that it will do is this reverse DNS addressing
is brilliant.
This solves a huge problem for the enterprise data space because now
you can actually encode your domain ownership literally in a domain
, like a domain name solution.
And you're able to, you can do that across an
entire organization, right?
So you can actually set up an organization, give every department
, every team, whatever, a path in that domain name
, reverse it, and then they can host their own le
xicons.
It does come up with the definition of the nouns.
This is actually, I don't know if you noticed when
I started it, I decided, I was really bored,
so I decided yesterday, instead of doing like Google Slides
, I would build my own slideshow system on at Pr
oto.
So I vibration-coded a slideshow system.
This is the lexicon for the slideshow.
And so you can see that there's, the nouns are
defined here.
I need a title, I need a short description, I
need maybe a timestamp when it's created.
All of that is there and it's contextual.
It's not just the data type, like the JSON data
type.
Of course, that is in there, but it tells me
what the meaning of that data is and why it's relevant
and why I should care about it.
And if I had gone a little bit farther, I would
have been able to put the verbs in here as well for
how to author a slideshow, how to assign permissions to
a slideshow, how to revoke permissions to a slides
how.
So I could turn this into essentially a Google Docs or
the Google Slides type of situation or a PowerPoint type of
situation by encoding what the actions are directly in the lex
icon.
So, again, I mentioned this kind of casually solved
all three of those problems, which would be a really big
benefit for an enterprise because not only does that mean that if
you can define a lexicon for your data products,
you can start sharing that data across your organization but also outside
of your organization if you want to publish those lexicons
openly.
And this is, by the way, not even talking about
using the PDS as your platform.
Like, I'm not necessarily talking about like, oh,
replace your data platform with a PDS and everything will be
solved.
I'm actually just talking about use a flexible data definition language
that gets away from all of the sort of dogmatism
of ontologies and all of that stuff and focus on actually
shareability rather than like fully fleshing out the definition
.
This is a standard way of doing it.
I think Emily Hunt spoke about this yesterday, like sharing exploding
stars data through a globally accessible standardized feed that every astronomy lab
in the world can subscribe to and then see the exact data
format for that data without having to go through and set up
their own Kafka consumers, without having to run a Kafka cluster
, all of that stuff.
That's a really compelling idea.
It's a really, really, really brilliant way of being
able to make that data available in a way that people can
not just access it but understand what it means.
So then this, like when I look at Lexicon,
actually the first time I saw Lexicon, I said,
I've been trying to develop this as a data product specification
language for the last three years and here it is.
So it's worth exploring.
I think that this is actually relevant because if you know me
from any of my other work, you know that I don
't really like fascists and one of the problems in the
data space is that I've mentioned this sort of cyclical
behavior.
We've gone from data warehouses to data lakes to streaming
architectures and back again and the trend right now is towards
consolidation and so you see companies like Palantir who go
up to these big organizations and government agencies and they say,
we can solve your data consolidation problems and I've never known
anyone who's used Palantir who likes it, right
?
But they sell it and they make a fuckload of money
selling it because they're promising companies to solve exactly this problem
that we can make all of your data accessible in one place
really easily and so my argument is if we want to be
able to break the stranglehold that these rent-se
eking platform organizations like Palantir like Oracle like all of
these other companies have we need to have a decentralized way of
sharing data and it needs to be consistent and we need to
get away from trying to overly define the languages and the specs
and all of that stuff the ontologies and we need to
focus on the ability for sharing and decentralizing that data.
That is necessary to fight fascism it's not just good
business.
So what do we need to make that work?
The problem with I mentioned going back to the beginning is that
software developers love working with cool technologies TypeScript and Go and
Rust and all of that stuff and us data folks we don
't know any of that.
We don't work in those languages.
We need better Python tooling.
The Marshall X library is great but I couldn't use it
to build my own lexicons.
Maybe I'm not smart enough but I just couldn't get
it to work to build my own stuff that wasn't built
around blue sky.
So I had to write my own lexicon data class
generator which was hard because I don't know I'm not
a computer science person I don't know what an abstract syntax
tree is I think that's the thing that the spotted lantern
flies eat.
But if you actually look at some of the stuff like le
xicon.
garden is an amazing like it's a global data catalog
like it solved a problem that I've watched companies pour millions
of dollars into and it just solved it like oh that's
cool you can register your lexicons and then we can
make a data catalog for them and it just did it right
.
So applying that tooling and making that tooling available at the enterprise
level or the business level would be really great and then we
also need a mindset like a lot of the conversation I've
been having here was really wrapped around social internet which is awesome
because I really believe in the social internet and like was moved
to tears for Aaron's talk today but this is so much
bigger than just social internet right this is data exchange at scale
which is more than just people talking to people it's also
about exchanging information.
We need better permissions management and private data I know all of
that is in progress but right now you can't have somebody
publishing their internal data to a PDS and then like putting
it out there and then we also need to have the tooling
to be able to run that stuff inside closed ecosystems and then
also like brave data people to start building radical shit because again
there's too much conservatism conservatism in the
data space unwillingness to try new approaches try new technologies if
more data people can start doing things like hey look I just
solved a globally distributed data problem with this cool protocol and some
Python and some lexicons then I think that we'll
be able to do some really great stuff.
So I'll wrap it up there just about on time thank
you so much let's chat about data.
Thank you.